=================================
Teacher's Portal Release Workflow
=================================

Quick Start
-----------

prerequisites:
  - ``git-release-notes`` - https://www.npmjs.com/package/git-release-notes
  - ``git-flow`` - https://github.com/nvie/gitflow
  - You've configured Git-Flow to use Teacher's Portal branch naming scheme.
    (See Git-Flow_ section below)

These instructions presume you're releasing Teacher's Portal version 0.3.0.

.. code-block:: bash

    git fetch
    git checkout master
    git pull
    git flow release start 0.3.0
    vi teachersportal/settings.py # change version number
    git-release-notes v0.2.0..master util/release_notes_rst.ejs
    vi RELEASE.rst # paste results of prior command at top of file, updating the release number
    git add RELEASE.rst teachersportal/settings.py
    git commit -m "Release 0.3.0"
    git flow release publish 0.3.0
    # Verify that the Travis-ci build succeeds
    git-release-notes v0.9.0..master util/release_notes.ejs
    # Create PR on the ``release-candidate`` branch named ``rc/0.3.0`` (The
    # PR description isn't important)
    # Merge this PR immediately to kick off the build
    # Create PR on the ``release`` branch named ``rc/0.3.0`` using the
    # console output from git-release-notes v0.9.0..master util/release_notes.ejs
    # as the PR description
    # Once the ``release`` branch deploys on https://teachersportal-rc.herokuapp.com ,
    # Instruct developers to view the ``release`` branch PR description and
    # validate their commits on https://teachersportal-rc.herokuapp.com
    # Wait for all checkboxes to be checked
    # Check with Dev-Ops buddy whether migrations need to be run for this release
    git flow release finish 0.3.0
    git push --tags
    # Send release notification to Teacher's Portal mailing list - odl-teachersportal-announce@mit.edu

Detailed Instructions
---------------------

Create, commit, and push release candidate branch
=================================================

.. code-block:: bash

    git fetch
    git checkout master
    git pull
    git flow release start 0.3.0

Update the ``VERSION`` number in ``teachersportal/settings.py`` following Semantic
numbering practice.

.. code-block:: bash

    vi teachersportal/settings.py # change version number

Generate the `release notes`_ in reStructuredText format:

.. code-block:: bash

  git-release-notes v0.9.0..master util/release_notes_rst.ejs

Update ``release.rst`` with this version's release notes (the console output
generated by running ``release_notes_rst.ejs``).  Edit the new
release notes to correct the release number, make each statement in the
past tense, capitalize the first word, and end sentences with a period.

.. code-block:: bash

    vi RELEASE.rst

Add, commit, and push the two files you have updated to publish
the release.

.. code-block:: bash

    git add RELEASE.rst teachersportal/settings.py
    git commit -m "Release 0.3.0"
    git flow release publish 0.3.0

The "release publish" (push) will trigger a build on Travis CI.
https://travis-ci.org/mitodl/teachersportal/builds  For each commit throughout
the release, it's good practice to check that the build succeeded
before proceeding.

Create Pull Requests
====================

Developers will start their verification tests as soon as
they learn that you've created the PR with the checkboxes.  Since
the deployment to ``teachersportal-rc`` can take a while, merge the
``release-candidate`` branch PR as soon as you create it to move
its deployment off the critical path.

Make three PRs based on the release branch you just published:

  - One to the ``release-candidate`` branch named ``rc/0.3.0``
  - Merge this PR immediately to kick off the build.
  - One to the ``release`` branch named ``rc/0.3.0`` containing a checklist of commits
  - one to the ``master`` branch named ``Release 0.3.0``

Run ``git-release-notes`` with the other template to create the
Pull Request descriptions for the ``release`` branch.

.. code-block:: bash

  git-release-notes v0.9.0..master util/release_notes.ejs

and paste the Markdown output as the description of the PR to the release
branch ``rc/0.3.0`` (This is the one with the checkboxes.)

Tell developers to test their changes on the Teacher's Portal release candidate
server, http://teachersportal-rc.herokuapp.com
and then bug team members until all the check boxes are checked.

Finish the release
==================

When all the boxes are checked finish the release.

.. code-block:: bash

    git flow release finish 0.3.0
    git push --tags

Follow this by merging the remaining PRs and sending a release notice
to Teacher's Portal users.

The email address of the Teacher's Portal mailing list we use for release notification
is odl-teachersportal-announce@mit.edu It is a mailman list located here:
https://mailman.mit.edu:444/mailman/admin/odl-teachersportal-announce/general
The list is set to hold all emails for review by list moderators who
are notified by email when an email is received.

Release Process Roles
=====================

The "release master" completes the bulk of these steps to bring the release 
to the point of deployment. The "dev-ops buddy" becomes involved to ensure 
that the deployment to production is successful. This most often involves 
running database migrations and doing the merge to release.
These roles closely follow edX's release procedure. 

.. _release notes:

``git-release-notes``
=====================

Create the release notes with a utility called ``git-release-notes``.
https://www.npmjs.com/package/git-release-notes  Its output is written
to the console.

``git-release-notes`` takes two command line arguments.  The first argument
takes a range of git references to determine which commits to include in
the release.  In the example given it is all commits from the last release
to what is in ``master``.

The second command argument specifies a template to format the output.
Teacher's Portal has two templates.

- ``util/release_notes_rst.ejs`` formats the output as
  reStructuredText for inclusion in ``RELEASE.rst``.

- ``util/release_notes.ejs`` formats the output as Markdown so as to
  precede each commit with a checkbox, and follow each with a link to
  the developer's commit history.  Add these release notes as the
  description for the GitHub PR to the ``release`` branch.

.. _Git-Flow:

Git-Flow
========

The Teacher's Portal project uses a different branch naming scheme than is the
Git-Flow default.  The easiest way to configure this alternate scheme
is to add this block to your ``~/.gitconfig`` file.

.. code-block:: bash

    [gitflow "branch"]
        master = release
        develop = master
    [gitflow "prefix"]
        feature = feature/
        release = rc/
        hotfix = hotfix/
        support = support/
        versiontag = v
